JSON Specification Primer (RFC 8259) — neutral reference

JSON, the JavaScript Object Notation, is a text-based interchange format defined authoritatively by RFC 8259 (December 2017), which obsoletes the earlier RFC 7159 and aligns the IETF specification with the ECMA-404 surface syntax. The format is language-independent: it inherits punctuation conventions from JavaScript object literals but the grammar, encoding rules, and value semantics described below are the normative definition for any conforming implementation.

Value grammar

A JSON text encodes exactly one value. The grammar admits seven concrete values: the three literal tokens true, false, and null; numeric literals; string literals delimited by double quotes; arrays surrounded by square brackets; and objects surrounded by curly braces. Whitespace consisting of space, horizontal tab, line feed, or carriage return is permitted between any two structural tokens and is otherwise insignificant.

Numbers are decimal, optionally signed with a leading minus, with an integer part, an optional fractional part introduced by a period, and an optional exponent introduced by e or E followed by an optional sign and one or more decimal digits. Leading zeros on the integer part are forbidden except for the single digit 0 itself. The grammar does not bound the magnitude or precision of numeric values; consumers commonly map JSON numbers to IEEE 754 double-precision floats, but the specification permits more precise representations.

Strings are sequences of Unicode code points enclosed in double quotes. Inside the quotes, the backslash escape sequences \", \\, \/, \b, \f, \n, \r, \t, and \uXXXX are recognised. The four-hex-digit form \uXXXX denotes a single Basic Multilingual Plane code point; characters outside the BMP are encoded using a UTF-16 surrogate pair, also written as two consecutive \uXXXX escapes. Control characters U+0000 through U+001F must be escaped; literal U+0022 (double quote) and U+005C (reverse solidus) inside a string must also be escaped.

Composite values

Arrays are ordered sequences of zero or more values separated by commas; trailing commas are not permitted. Objects are unordered collections of name/value pairs, where each name is a string and each value is any JSON value. RFC 8259 explicitly states that the names within an object should be unique and that the behaviour of software receiving non-unique names is unpredictable; many implementations reject duplicate keys, others retain only the last occurrence.

Encoding

JSON texts exchanged between systems that are not part of a closed ecosystem must be encoded using UTF-8. UTF-16 and UTF-32 are permitted only in closed environments by historical agreement. A JSON text that begins with a Unicode byte-order mark is not strictly conformant; receivers may either ignore the BOM or treat its presence as an error.

Worked example

A minimal but well-formed example illustrating each value kind:

  {
    "schema": "https://example.invalid/profile/v1",
    "version": 3,
    "released": true,
    "deprecated": null,
    "authors": ["a", "b"],
    "metrics": { "size": 4096, "ratio": 0.875 }
  }

The text above parses successfully under any RFC 8259 conformant parser: the object has six well-formed members, the array authors has two well-formed string elements, and the nested metrics object has two well-formed numeric members.

Scope

This document is a neutral descriptive primer of RFC 8259. It does not introduce malformed input, parser-fuzzing artefacts, or any payload intended to elicit error states from a consumer. It is suitable for inclusion in a benign-control fixture set.
